In this section we'll learn how to manage metadata for a post.
So let's start by defining what is a metadata.
So if you open any post here. And let's edit this one. So by default the post will have some information
associated with it like the Title and the Content and Categories.
And we also have if you press Screen Options here we can have the Excerpt and it can also have custom
fields.
So metadata refers to any data associated with a post. And WordPress allows us to add extra metadata
to the post other than the Title and the Excerpt and the Content and all the other stuff.
And that is done through custom fields.
So if you take a look at this Custom Fields box here you can add a new custom field or you can choose
from some existing custom fields.
So let's for example, add a new custom field. I'm sorry I should enter new here. And let's call it maybe "price"
and the value will be "20".
And let's update.
So now we're having this extra meta information available for this post.
So let's view the post now. And let's go and remove this var_dump() here.
This was in helpers.
And now we want to display this custom field in our post.
So how to do that.
Let's go to where we display this post which was in the template-parts and content.
And as I told you before the single blog page will have a special template called single.php but we haven't
created this yet.
So let's just do our testing in the content not
PHP for now. And let's var_dump().
And let's retrieve the Custom Field and this is using a function called get_post_meta().
So this takes the post ID. So in our case we are in the loop so we can use get_the_ID().
And it takes the key and the key is.
So let's before doing that let's make the terminology clear here.
So we said we have the metadata which are information associated with a post. And this metadata consists
of two parts: the meta key and the meta value.
So the key is the "prize" here in this example and its value is "20".
So the key is how you will reference this value here. And to retrieve this value we will pass this key here.
So we have our meta key and meta value and to manage these keys and values we use custom fields which
are these HTML fields.
Right?
So we've metadata and meta key and meta value and custom field. And we have also a third argument and
we'll see that in a moment so let's remove it now. And let's see what this will output. And as you can see it's an array
of length 1 and the first value in this array is 20 which is the value here.
So why is it an array?
It's because we can add multiple meta values to one meta key. So we can add the the "price" here again
And let's say "30" and save. And now let's go back and refresh and we now have the two values.
And that actually why there is a third argument here.
The third argument here, it's a boolean and if you set it to "true" it will return the last value in the
array.
And if it's "false", and it's "false" by default, it will return the whole array.
So let's refresh now or we don't have to refresh. And we have a string instead of array with a value
of 20.
So it actually presents the first value in the array.
So great, we now know how to add meta information to our post but this Custom Fields
box here is kind of impractical, right?
So as a theme developer you'll use in your theme some meta keys here and then to let your users use it.
You'll have to ask them to put the meta key and the meta value.
And this is kind of weird, right?
We need to let the users just type the value.
So that's what we will do in this section.
We will learn how to create a box like this one.
And this is called a meta box.
So these white boxes are called meta boxes.
And we'll learn how to add our own fields in it. And this won't just be a text field like it is here.
We'll be able to add an input or a checkbox or a dropdown or any other field.
And we'll also handle these meta keys internally without asking the users to type the meta key.
But before doing that let's discuss some stuff first.
So let's go to localhost and 8888 which is MAMP port and then phpmyadmin.
And I've seen this before.
This is where you can manage your databases. So let's go to our database and I just want to show you where
the custom fields are stored.
So we have the wp_posts.
Remember when I told you that all the posts including the posts and pages and the attachments are stored here.
And they are distinguished by the post_type column here.
So we have page, post, attachment etc..
You also have a separate table for meta data.
So it's called wp_postmeta.
And it contains meta keys and metal values and the post ID that this meta information is associated with.
So let's display 500 per page just to. Let's just search for the "price" that we just created.
So it's maybe in the third page.
Yes.
And as you can see we have two "price" and both of them are related to the same post ID but they have
different meta value.
So when we create our custom fields in our own meta boxes you'll probably need to have only one value
for your key. And we'll learn how to do that when we discuss meta boxes.
So I just wanted to show you the database here.
Let's also point out something. If you have a prior experience with a before you probably know plugins
like Advanced Custom Fields. And this plugin helps you add the meta boxes that we will learn how to add
in the section without writing any code.
So you may want to use this plugin and integrate it with your theme and they have in the documentation a guide
to how to integrate it with your theme.
But in this section I want to focus on how to create these fields on our own without any plugins.
And maybe we could do a lecture on how to integrate advanced custom fields in your theme. Let me know if you like that.
What this plugin will allow you to do is create meta box like this box like the Excerp box for example and
add some fields in it. And you can choose from a wide variety of field like text field, textarea, range,
checkboxes and everything you can imagine.
So it's definitely a great plugin.
But in this case I just want to focus on letting, you know, how to do everything by yourself.
So anyways the final thing I want to mention in this lecture is that you might have heard about this.
But amusing, as I'm recording this I'm using version 4.9.7 of
WordPress.
And if your version is like me less than 5 as you're watching this you will have this page as you
see it now. But after version 5 WordPress will completely change how this page looks. And this will of
course have some effect on how to do things in this section.
So what WordPress allows to is, it allows us to use this new page before it's officially released.
And that's using a plugin.
So let's go to Plugins and Add New. And the plugin is called Gutenburg which is this one.
And this will allow you to use the new editor, post editor before it's officially released so you can
develop with it before it's released for the normal users.
So let's activate it.
And let's go back to the post page and refresh.
And as you can see it's a completely different page.
And they actually remove the Custom Fields box that we added the "price" in but that's not important
we still can add our own meta boxes.
So let's deactivate this plugin for now and during this section I will turn it on and off to see
the differences
when we are creating our meta boxes. So to start creating the meta boxes in the next lecture.